# Towards a Fresh Water Lakes Dashboard

## Intro

In 2012, I developed the Great Lakes Water Levels Dashboard for the North American Laurentian Great Lakes. Hosted by the [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory](https://www.glerl.noaa.gov), and supported by the [University of Michigan's Cooperative Institute for Great Lakes Research](https://ciglr.seas.umich.edu) along with numerous other Great Lakes organizations, the Adobe Flash dashboard disseminated lakewide average water level data for stakeholders and other interested parties (marina owners, yacht club members, general boaters, beachgoers, etc.).

Flash's true end of life eventually came in about 2021 (I may have that wrong... it's been years and a number of events since then), and so too did the original dashboard. A JavaScript, HTML5 draft had been made, and held water for a time. I moved on to work with the Great Lakes Observing System that same year to pick up more experience in software development coincident with the production of [Seagull](https://seagull.glos.org). In the years since, the proliferation of [Large Language Models (LLMs) took hold of the world for better and worse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_language_model). This includes the development of coding agents that can be prompted to generate working code, the function thereof may need further tuning. Ars Technica - a technology news publication - wrote at least a couple of articles documenting progress as of 2026 ([1](https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2026/01/10-things-i-learned-from-burning-myself-out-with-ai-coding-agents/), [2](https://arstechnica.com/ai/2026/02/sixteen-claude-ai-agents-working-together-created-a-new-c-compiler/)).

Seeing this significant progress, and the implications on software development and the career as a whole, I saw a need to explore this technology.

## First, a Note on LLMs, Data Centers, and Choices to Make

If you've done any reading on LLMs, what they are, how they got good at what they do, and whatnot, worry not. This is not an essay re-hash of all that. This is more a statement to make clear I am aware of some of the factors involved, and where I sit. Additionally, I purposefully use as plain language as possible, to the point where this is safely not exhaustive. I hope the points are coherent enough, however.

LLMs are built upon numerous instances of machine learning methods and models which require a massive weighting scheme. In order to tune that weighting scheme to something performant, lots of data are required. Further, in order to perform that actual tuning to something performant and in a timely manner, lots of energy fed into valuable mineral composed hardware (memory, processors) is also required. Thus, data centers have been popping up like the first flowers of spring in some spots. There's a fairly recent book on the material side of all this: [*Power Metal* by Vince Beiser](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/709947/power-metal-by-vince-beiser/). It holds nothing back and does a very balanced job in doing so in my opinion.

There may be a number of articles like this, but in a rarity for a hyper-local publication, there was [a real good feature from the Chelsea, Dexter, Milan, and Saline, Michigan, USA Sun Time News](./no_win_decision_saline_data_center_202512) explaining the series of events that led up to the construction of a data center in and near farmland in Saline Township. It's between the suddenness of the data center issue here, and elsewhere in the country [(and around the world)](https://www.weforum.org/stories/2025/04/data-centre-gold-rush-ai/), plus the rapid-response by those building them to get past legal hurdles, that makes me feel an indication of some degree of these companies having a lock on a path forward. It feels like developers have a set number of data centers they want built, and they've identified a number of sites to attempt to build on, with that number multiplied by a success rate yielding the set number they're aiming for.

Protest is still important to attempt to tap the brakes on developments and potentially force rounds of reconsiderations if the collective data-center-zealous lot has the conscience to do so. Meanwhile, if 20 USD a month to Anthropic gets you a fair amount of capacity to put Claude to work on projects large and small, and you can't just switch off the LLM world, might as well tap it and see what comes of it. I say this with a [fair portfolio of non-LLM generated work](https://joesephpaulsmith.github.io/portfolio).

So, there's great personal discomfort just to this point in my narrative about it all. C'est la vie. Such is life. I'm mad about it, and it's good to write and get those feelings out about it in order to move forward. You'll see some of those feelings come out here as a result, along with a preference to laugh rather than cry. The other part of moving forward is further seeing what's possible with all this. That's what we're doing here.

Lastly, granted as I am typing this out, [Anthropic has some decisions of their own to make](https://arstechnica.com/ai/2026/02/pete-hegseth-wants-unfettered-access-to-anthropics-models-for-the-military/), I have to say it is a crying shame our Defense Secretary in 2026 isn't named [Dave](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/5lsExRvJTAI).

## Couple of Quick Apps

I've had a couple of apps brewing in my mind of late, namely to start entering the [Progressive Web App (PWA)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps) space. Native mobile app development, despite high demand for versions of web apps in that form, is incredibly time consuming and can get complex when trying to manage differences in mobile hardware. A PWA is a possible best-of-both-worlds situation where your website can be much like a mobile app in feel and function. There's [a very large list of features that can be baked into a plain web app these days](https://whatpwacando.today/). So between that and a coding LLM, we can probably make some cool stuff happen really quick.

The first app I note here is mostly a silly way to make a simple point. I made a dollar-store styled, [symbolic version of The Price Is Right's classic pricing game "Cover Up", complete with simple win statistics (see About)](https://joesephpaulsmith.github.io/coverup/). Obviously, there's no point in guessing the price of a car online. You can probably make some choices, however, that can increase your chances of winning that have nothing to do with the price of the car.

Secondly, and even simpler, is [A Dull Moment](https://joesephpaulsmith.github.io/adullmoment/), if you need one. Pop in local storage an image you want to take a break with, and then set a calendar reminder (not terribly feature complete there) to take a moment with it. It's a ***potential*** tool to pull the brain out of the aggressive, infinite stream of media content coming out of social and streaming media these days. Not *the* tool. Folks can take it or leave it.

Both the apps I sat down to make over the course of a few scattered, very casual weekend evenings over a drink of choice. There was an initial `claude.md` file, then follow-up discussions with Claude. Bugs, reminders of intent, refinements, and then some final requests formed these first editions. I discovered GitHub actions and amazing utility therein through this process.

## Tell Claude to Remake the Dashboard

It's implementation, stupid. That's the biggest hurdle to developing an application in my mind. I can conceive an idea, draft up interface designs, draft up diagrams of workflows between users and data, and even picture what the code looks like. Python is great for a lot of these things. Web technologies have evolved pretty quickly, and the Javascript powering them has gotten quite complex. Bottom line, however, is that even a basic understanding of computer science object features, data structures, and algorithms makes the path towards desired outcomes conceptually clear (note this is not about material, or hardware). In that light, the value of being a human expert in the basics of software engineering, architecting, and the like, is still quite there. An LLM could try to explain it to you, but could it effectively walk you through it either in text or artificial voice? Could you guaruntee a person to understand through either way?

The devil's in the implementation details, where productivity can get snagged by something as simple as a missing semi-colon, logical error, or worse, a niche method that's documented but not readily thought of (that last point goes for Python too). Heck, there are people who can tell stories of literal bugs getting in the way of punch cards too. *Talent*, in that light, is a product of having the ***luck*** of knowing the applicable syntax of JavaScript, a JavaScript framework, Cascading Style Sheets, or whatever platform and language you're working with, ***at the right time***. Granted it's luck, the frustration is not worth it, as you're no better than a pidgeon who, doing whatever they were doing when a food pellet suddenly fell into the cage, repeats that action in hopes of another pellet.

Implementation made aspects of the original dashboard, and a re-hash to HTML5, time consuming and frustrating in spots, particularly in navigating plotting libraries in Flash and Javascript. So their style was severely lacking, and granted other priorities we never got around to making it better. Claude made it tempting enough to revisit the project, and so I did. Incidentally, I performed [some of the workflows noted in the Claude Code Docs](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/common-workflows). After absolutely not wanting to re-write the specs from memory, I started with analyzing the old codebases that I had in archive, and had it report back on findings and make a proposal. It was quite feature complete. I modified the proposal, cherry-picking for preferences, and sent it through. The first version it spit out did not resemble anything like the original or HTML5 dashbaord (of course), but it got some mechanics right. 

So conversation followed, including on layout, obviously deviating from the older versions. One particular knot I'll highlight is that the plotting library of choice these days - [Apache Echarts](https://echarts.apache.org/en/index.html) - still suffers from pitfalls of days past, particulary with clean cut step plots and tooltips for them. On that point, I had to work it a bit. Eventually it figured out inserting null values for parts of the plot backing data, and a data mapping strategy for the tooltips which I quite appreciated.

[I'll leave a link to the current result here.](https://joesephpaulsmith.github.io/fwld/) The data are ported to a JSON file via a Python script. Some degree of numerical validation needs to be done but visually things seem to check.

## That was Pretty Good. What Next?

Lights out, possibly. Claude, primarily, but also other coding models are on the programming side of full-automation of software development and deployment. There will be a reduction in labor force as a result of this technology. Skills may still be in-demand for architecting and engineering the full stack of applications, but the human resource cost of development should drop precipitously. It's not just programming, either. [In the past year (2025), reports have come in noting *"Western automotive and green energy executives who visit China are returning humbled -- and even terrified."* after observing fully robotic, even dark 24/7 factories producing automotive and green energy components.](https://slashdot.org/story/25/10/16/006222/western-executives-shaken-after-visiting-china). 

Therefor, as a people, we'll continue to need to figure out how to run and power an economy wherein a number of manual tasks have been automated not just in the physical world but also digital. It was once thought, emerging from a great recession no less, an information economy could come through. We need to keep a flow of money, energy, resources, and fundamental goods going, somehow, in a more sustainable way, to support a lot of people.

Closer to the dashboard, however, it is tempting to take application development to the next level, scour the internet for data on fresh water lakes across the globe, and provide that information in a nice interface for those interested. So that maybe in the cards for the next iterations here. Thus the title.

I'll leave it there. Take care and good luck out there.